<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They go on the principle that it is better than one innocent man should suffer than five hundred. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>July, 1867. <a href="chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Colonel <b><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Heron Foster</b>, editor of a Pittsburgh journal, and a most estimable gentleman. As these sheets are being prepared for the press I am pained to learn of his decease shortly after his return home⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. T.</abbr> <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The italics are mine⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. T.</abbr>⁠ <a href="chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quotation from the Pilgrims. <a href="chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Excuse the slang, no other word will describe it. <a href="chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The railroad has been completed since the above was written. <a href="chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I measure all lakes by Tahoe, partly because I am far more familiar with it than with any other, and partly because I have such a high admiration for it and such a world of pleasant recollections of it, that it is very nearly impossible for me to speak of lakes and not mention it. <a href="chapter-48.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A Koorbash is Arabic for cowhide, the cow being a rhinoceros. It is the most cruel whip known to fame. Heavy as lead, and flexible as India-rubber, usually about forty inches long and tapering gradually from an inch in diameter to a point, it administers a blow which leaves its mark for time.”</p>
						<cite>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scow Life in Egypt</i>, by the same author.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-50.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The thought is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Prime’s, not mine, and is full of good sense. I borrowed it from his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tent Life</i>.—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. T.</abbr> <a href="chapter-53.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A pilgrim informs me that it was not David and Goliath, but David and Saul. I stick to my own statement⁠—the guide told me, and he ought to know. <a href="chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Favorite pilgrim expression. <a href="chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was an unselfish act of benevolence; it was done without any ostentation, and has never been mentioned in any newspaper, I think. Therefore it is refreshing to learn now, several months after the above narrative was written, that another man received all the credit of this rescue of the colonists. Such is life. <a href="chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stated to me for a fact. I only tell it as I got it. I am willing to believe it. I can believe anything. <a href="chapter-58.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Afterwards presented to the Central Park. <a href="chapter-59.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
